[Docs] Adding Noisy Simulation documentation (#662)
pasqal-io/qadence: docs/content/noisy_simulation.md

## Applicable noise types

The noise models applicable in `Qadence` are classified into three types: digital, analog, and readout error. Digital and analog noise are applicable to `gates`, `blocks`, `circuits`, and `Models`. Readout error is applicable to `sample` and `expectation`. The following is a list of the supported types of noise.

### Digital noise

- BitFlip
- PhaseFlip
- Depolarizing
- PauliChannel
- AmplitudeDamping
- PhaseDamping
- GeneralizedAmplitudeDamping

### Analog noise

- Depolarizing
- Dephasing

### Readout errors

- Independent
- Correlated

## NoiseHandler

Noise models can be defined via the `NoiseHandler`. It is a container of several noise instances which require to specify a `protocols` and
a dictionary of `options` (or lists). The `protocol` field is to be instantiated from `NoiseProtocol`.

```python exec="on" source="material-block" session="noise" result="json"
from qadence import NoiseHandler
from qadence.types import NoiseProtocol

> digital_noise = NoiseHandler(protocol=NoiseProtocol.DIGITAL.DEPOLARIZING, options={"error_probability": 0.1})

Author: The `NoiseHandler` is normally used with a single noise protocol. The reason I stated like above is because several noise methods(digital, analog, readout errors) can be initiated with the same `NoiseHandler`. It seems it could be misinterpreted so I'll fix the statement.
Still, `NoiseHandler` can be used with multiple `protocols` with corresponding `options` when they form list.
I'll insert this example as well.

analog_noise = NoiseHandler(protocol=NoiseProtocol.ANALOG.DEPOLARIZING, options={"noise_probs": 0.1})
readout_noise = NoiseHandler(protocol=NoiseProtocol.READOUT.INDEPENDENT, options={"error_probability": 0.1, "seed": 0})
```

## Digital noisy simulation

When dealing with programs involving only digital operations, several options are made available from [PyQTorch](https://pasqal-io.github.io/pyqtorch/latest/noise/) via the `NoiseProtocol.DIGITAL`. To use the digital noise option, one needs to state the `protocol` and `error_probability`. All noise types require a single float for the error_probability, while the PauliChannel and GeneralizedAmplitudeDamping require a tuple of error probabilities. One can define noisy digital operations as follows:

```python exec="on" source="material-block" session="noise" result="json"
from qadence import NoiseProtocol, RX, run
import torch

noise = NoiseHandler(NoiseProtocol.DIGITAL.BITFLIP, {"error_probability": 0.2})
op = RX(0, torch.pi, noise = noise)

> print(run(op))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
print(f"Noisy density matrix = {run(op)}")  # markdown-exec: hide
```

```

It is also possible to set a noise configuration to gates within a composite block or circuit as follows:

```python exec="on" source="material-block" session="noise" result="json"
from qadence import set_noise, chain, QuantumCircuit

n_qubits = 2

> block = chain(RX(i, f"theta_{i}") for i in range(n_qubits))

Reviewer: Your `chain` here is a `kron` in effect as the support for each gate is different ?

Author: Yes correct. I think `kron` is better in this code. Thanks.

noise = NoiseHandler(NoiseProtocol.DIGITAL.BITFLIP, {"error_probability": 0.1})

# The function changes the block in place:
set_noise(block, noise)

> print(run(block))

Reviewer: Please use `# markdown-exec: hide`. It hides the execution and create a new cell with the evaluation, which is neater.

Reviewer: Other point, does it apply to _all_ gates in the block ?

Author: Yes

circuit = QuantumCircuit(2, block)
noise = NoiseHandler(NoiseProtocol.DIGITAL.BITFLIP, {"error_probability": 0.3})

> set_noise(circuit, noise)

Reviewer: Same, applied to all gates ? I don't see too much of a difference between the two examples appart from the fact that `set_noise` applies to different types.

Author: Yeah. just wanted to show different types are working the same.

print(run(circuit))
```

> One can set different noise environments in each gates within the same circuit as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One can set different noise models for each individual gates within the same circuit as follows:
```

Reviewer: Ah, so `set_noise` sets noise globally whereas this example shows local noise setting.

```python exec="on" source="material-block" session="noise" result="json"
from qadence import QuantumCircuit, X, sample, kron
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

n_qubits = 2

> noise_0 = NoiseHandler(NoiseProtocol.DIGITAL.BITFLIP, {"error_probability": 0.1})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
noise_bitflip = NoiseHandler(NoiseProtocol.DIGITAL.BITFLIP, {"error_probability": 0.1})
```

> noise_1 = NoiseHandler(NoiseProtocol.DIGITAL.BITFLIP, {"error_probability": 0.2})

Reviewer: Maybe another noise model ? Say, phase flip ?

block = kron(X(0, noise=noise_0), X(1, noise=noise_1))
circuit = QuantumCircuit(n_qubits, block)

n_shots=1000
xs = sample(circuit, n_shots=n_shots)
print(xs)

items = list(xs[0].keys())
values = [v/n_shots for v in xs[0].values()]

plt.figure()
plt.bar(range(len(values)), values, color='blue', alpha=0.7)
plt.xticks(range(len(items)), items)
plt.title("Probability of state occurrence")
plt.xlabel('Possible States')
plt.ylabel('Probability')

> plt.show()

Reviewer: this doesn't show in the docs.

```

There is an extra optional argument to specify the type of block we want to apply noise to. E.g., let's say we want to apply noise only to `X` gates, a `target_class` argument can be passed with the corresponding block:

```python exec="on" source="material-block" session="noise" result="json"
from qadence import X
block = chain(RX(0, "theta"), X(0))
set_noise(block, noise, target_class = X)

for block in block.blocks:

>     print(block.noise)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    print(f"Noise type for block {block} is {block.noise}.")
```

```

## Analog noisy simulation

> Analog noise needs to declare `protocol` and `noise_probs` at the `NoiseHnadler`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Analog noise models need to declare a `protocol` and a `noise_probs` at the `NoiseHandler` level.
```

> At the moment, analog noisy simulations are only compatable with the Pulser backend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the moment, analog noisy simulations are only compatible with the Pulser backend.
```

- `seed`: defaulted to `None`, for reproducibility purposes

Noisy simulations go hand-in-hand with measurement protocols. In this case, both measurement and noise protocols have to be defined appropriately. Please note that a measurement protocol without a noise protocol will be ignored for expectation values computations.

```python exec="on" source="material-block" session="noise" result="json"
from qadence.measurements import Measurements

# Define a noise model with options.
options = {"error_probability": 0.01}
noise = NoiseHandler(protocol=NoiseProtocol.READOUT.INDEPENDENT, options=options)

# Define a tomographical measurement protocol with options.
options = {"n_shots": 10000}
measurement = Measurements(protocol=Measurements.TOMOGRAPHY, options=options)

# Run noiseless and noisy simulations.
noiseless_exp = model.expectation(measurement=measurement)
noisy_exp = model.expectation(measurement=measurement, noise=noise)

print(f"noiseless = {noiseless_exp}") # markdown-exec: hide
print(f"noisy = {noisy_exp}") # markdown-exec: hide
```

> ## Extensive use of NoiseHandler

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Advanced use of the `NoiseHandler`
```

Reviewer: I have the feeling this comes a little late in the flow of the reading. Maybe possible to add it to the section about the description and use of the `NoiseHandler` ?

# Noisy Simulation

Running programs on NISQ devices often leads to partially useful results due to the presence of noise. In order to perform realistic simulations, a number of noise models (for digital operations, analog operations and simulated readout errors) are supported in Qadence; through their implementation in backends and corresponding error mitigation techniques whenever possible.

We consider a probabilistic combination $p_i$ of possible pure states $|\psi_i \rangle$. Thus, the system is described by a density matrix $\rho$ defined as follows:

$$
\rho = \sum_i p_i |\psi_i\rangle \langle \psi_i|
$$

The transformations of the density operator of an open quantum system interacting with its environment (noise) are represented by the super-operator $S: \rho \rightarrow S(\rho)$; super-operator can be written in the following form:

$$
S(\rho) = \sum_i K_i \rho K^{\dagger}_i
$$

Where $K_i$ are the Kraus operators, and satisfy the property $\sum_i K_i K^{\dagger}_i = \mathbb{I}$. As noise is the result of system interactions with its environment, it is therefore possible to simulate noisy quantum circuit with noise type gates.

## Applicable noise types

> The noise models applicable in `Qadence` are classified into three types: digital, analog, and readout error. Digital and analog noise are applicable to `gates`, `blocks`, `circuits`, and `Models`. Readout error is applicable to `sample` and `expectation`.

Reviewer: Is this sentence really true ?

` Readout error is applicable to `sample` and `expectation`.`

Author: Yes. To my understanding, readout error can be applied to sample and expectation as they have noise input parameter. only run is not applicable as in `qadence/execution.py`. Could you let me know if it is incorrect?

Reviewer: Hm, yeah. What I meant is that: 1) I _think_ readout applies to samples only. In the sense that it mimics hardware inaccuracies in measurements. I assume expectation computes <phi|O|phi> where |phi> is given from `run()`. I encourage you to check in the code if that's the case. 2) It feels a bit strange to talk about it here when all the examples that follow use the readout noise through the handler. This is why I definitely think we should revisit the structure of the doc.

> When dealing with programs involving digital operations, `Qadence` has interface to noise models implemented in `PyQTorch`. The following is a list of the supported types of noise. Detailed equation of noise options are available from [PyQTorch](https://pasqal-io.github.io/pyqtorch/latest/noise/).

Reviewer: Maybe move this sentence to the next section ?

### Digital noise

> - BitFlip: flips between |0⟩ and |1⟩ with `error_probability`

Reviewer: Maybe you can add links to the API section for details on how to use them.

- PhaseFlip: flips the phase of a qubit by applying a Z gate with `error_probability`

- Depolarizing: randomizes the state of a qubit by applying I, X, Y, or Z gates with equal `error_probability`

- PauliChannel: applies one of the Pauli operators (X, Y, Z) to a qubit with specified `error_probabilities`

- AmplitudeDamping: transitions qubit status from |1⟩ to |0⟩ with `damping_rate`

- PhaseDamping: reduces coherence by randomizing the phase with `damping_rate`

- GeneralizedAmplitudeDamping: extends amplitude damping; the first float is `error_probability` of amplitude damping, and second float is the `damping_rate`

### Analog noise

> - Depolarizing: evolves to th maximally mixed state with `noise_probs`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Depolarizing: evolves to the maximally mixed state with `noise_probs`
```

Reviewer: I would also add a quick intro sentence to analog noise and the fact that it is implemented in PyQ and Pulser.

### Readout errors

> 

Reviewer: Intro sentence ?

- Independent: all bits are corrupted with an equal `error_probability`
- Correlated: apply `confusion_matrix` on error probabilities

## NoiseHandler

Noise models can be defined via the `NoiseHandler` type. It is a container of several noise instances which require to specify a `protocol` and a dictionary of `options` (or lists). The `protocol` field is to be instantiated from `NoiseProtocol` and `options` includes error-related information such as `error_probability`, `noise_probs`, and `seed`.

```python exec="on" source="material-block" session="noise" result="json"
from qadence import NoiseHandler
from qadence.types import NoiseProtocol

> digital_noise = NoiseHandler(protocol=NoiseProtocol.DIGITAL.DEPOLARIZING, options={"error_probability": 0.1})

Reviewer: I thought it'd be possible to instantiate noise from protocols only. If that's the case, I wouldn't jump directly to the handler to describe noise instantiations but rather use them in the previous sections and combine them in the handler here.

analog_noise = NoiseHandler(protocol=NoiseProtocol.ANALOG.DEPOLARIZING, options={"noise_probs": 0.1})
readout_noise = NoiseHandler(protocol=NoiseProtocol.READOUT.INDEPENDENT, options={"error_probability": 0.1, "seed": 0})
```

> `NoiseHandler` can be used in a more compact way to represent noise in batches.

Reviewer: Maybe move to the next section ?

```python exec="on" source="material-block" session="noise" result="json"
from qadence import NoiseHandler
from qadence.types import NoiseProtocol

depo_noise = NoiseHandler(protocol=NoiseProtocol.DIGITAL.DEPOLARIZING, options={"error_probability": 0.1})
readout_noise = NoiseHandler(protocol=NoiseProtocol.READOUT.INDEPENDENT, options={"error_probability": 0.1, "seed": 0})

noise_combination = NoiseHandler(protocol=NoiseProtocol.DIGITAL.BITFLIP, options={"error_probability": 0.1})
noise_combination.append([depo_noise, readout_noise])
print(noise_combination)  # markdown-exec: hide
```

### Using pre-defined type

One can add directly a few pre-defined types using several `NoiseHandler` methods:

```python exec="on" source="material-block" session="noise" result="json"
from qadence import NoiseHandler
from qadence.types import NoiseProtocol
noise_combination = NoiseHandler(protocol=NoiseProtocol.DIGITAL.BITFLIP, options={"error_probability": 0.1})
noise_combination.digital_depolarizing({"error_probability": 0.1}).readout_independent({"error_probability": 0.1, "seed": 0})
print(noise_combination)  # markdown-exec: hide
```

!!! warning "NoiseHandler scope"

>     Note it is not possible to define a `NoiseHandler` instances with both digital and analog noises, both readout and analog noises, several analog noises, several readout noises, or a readout noise that is not the last defined protocol within `NoiseHandler`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Note it is not possible to define `NoiseHandler` instances with both digital and analog noises, both readout and analog noises, several analog noises, several readout noises, or a readout noise that is not the last defined protocol within `NoiseHandler`.
```

## Digital noisy simulation

To use the digital noise option, one needs to state the `protocol` and `error_probability` in `NoiseHandler`. All noise types require a single float for the error_probability, while the `PauliChannel` and `GeneralizedAmplitudeDamping` require a tuple of error probabilities. One can define noisy digital operations as follows:

```python exec="on" source="material-block" session="noise" result="json"
from qadence import NoiseProtocol, RX, run, NoiseHandler
import torch

noise = NoiseHandler(NoiseProtocol.DIGITAL.BITFLIP, {"error_probability": 0.2})

> op = RX(0, torch.pi, noise = noise)

Reviewer: Isn't it possible to pass on a `NoiseProtocol` here ?

print(f"Noisy density matrix = {run(op)}")  # markdown-exec: hide
```

It is also possible to set a noise configuration to gates within a composite block or circuit as follows:

```python exec="on" source="material-block" session="noise" result="json"
from qadence import set_noise, kron, QuantumCircuit, RX, NoiseHandler, NoiseProtocol, run

n_qubits = 2

block = kron(RX(i, f"theta_{i}") for i in range(n_qubits))

noise = NoiseHandler(NoiseProtocol.DIGITAL.BITFLIP, {"error_probability": 0.1})

# The function changes the block in place:
set_noise(block, noise)
print(run(block)) # markdown-exec: hide

> 

Reviewer: Maybe add a comment here ?

# Noisy Simulation

> Running programs on NISQ devices often leads to partially useful results due to the presence of noise. In order to perform realistic simulations, a number of noise models (for digital operations, analog operations and simulated readout errors) are supported in Qadence.

Reviewer 2: You mean imperfect results right?

> Noisy simulations shift the quantum paradigm from a close-system to an open-system represented by a probabilistic combination $p_i$ of possible pure states $|\psi_i \rangle$. Thus, the system is described by a density matrix $\rho$ defined as follows:

Reviewer 2: Add also in parenthesis: `$\rho$ (and computation modify the density matrix) defined as follows`.

$$
\rho = \sum_i p_i |\psi_i\rangle \langle \psi_i|
$$

The transformations of the density operator of an open quantum system interacting with its environment (noise) are represented by the super-operator $S: \rho \rightarrow S(\rho)$. Any arbitrary super-operator can be decomposed in the following form:

$$
S(\rho) = \sum_i K_i \rho K^{\dagger}_i
$$

> Where $K_i$ are the Kraus operators, and satisfy the property $\sum_i K_i K^{\dagger}_i = \mathbb{I}$. As noise is the result of system interactions with its environment, it is therefore possible to simulate noisy quantum circuit with noisy type of gates.

Reviewer 2: I don't think this is the same formalism in the analog case. See [this link](https://pulser.readthedocs.io/en/stable/tutorials/effective_noise.html).

## Noise Protocols

> The noise protocols applicable in `Qadence` are classified into three types: digital, analog, and readout error. Digital noise in quantum computers occurs due to unintended state changes during the gate operations such as `BitFlip` or `AmplitudeDamping`. Analog noise is when qubits lose coherence due to environmental interactions, as in `Depolarizing`. Readout error arises during the measurement process, leading to incorrect state assignment due to imperfections in the detection mechanism.

Reviewer 2: I think we need to change sentences. Especially all can be framed as an effect of the environment and we simulate this via noise models. Maybe use these:
- Digital noise refer to unintended changes occurring with reference to the application of a noiseless digital gate operation.
-  Analog noise concern only analog operations. 
- Readout error arises during the measurement process, leading to incorrect measurement outcomes.

Each noise protocol requires specific `options` parameter for its usage which can be found [here](https://github.com/pasqal-io/qadence/blob/main/qadence/noise/protocols.py).

### Digital noise protocol

The following are the protocols of supported digital noise, along with brief descriptions. For digital noise, the `error_probability` is necessary for the noise initialization at the `options` parameter.

- BITFLIP: flips between |0⟩ and |1⟩ with `error_probability`

- PHASEFLIP: flips the phase of a qubit by applying a Z gate with `error_probability`

- DEPOLARIZING: randomizes the state of a qubit by applying I, X, Y, or Z gates with equal `error_probability`

> - PAULI_CHANNEL: applies one of the Pauli operators (X, Y, Z) to a qubit with specified `error_probabilities`

Reviewer 2: not one of, but all three with specified probabilties no?

> - AMPLITUDE_DAMPING: transitions qubit status from |1⟩ to |0⟩ with `error_probability`

Reviewer 2: How is amplitude dampling different from bitflip? Is a  flip not a transition per se?

- PHASE_DAMPING: reduces coherence by randomizing the phase with `error_probability`

- GENERALIZED_AMPLITUDE_DAMPING: extends amplitude damping; the first float is `error_probability` of amplitude damping, and second float is the `damping_rate`

For digital noise simulation, you need to state `NoiseProtocol` with `DIGITAL` and then specify the noise type. Also, you put the value of `error_probability` as in next example.

```python exec="on" source="material-block" session="noise" result="json"
from qadence import NoiseProtocol

protocol = NoiseProtocol.DIGITAL.DEPOLARIZING
options = {"error_probability": 0.1}
```

### Analog noise protocol

> Qadence is in the process of fully supporting all the noise protocols in the backend(especially `Pulser`). However, we are in transition, and currently, only DEPOLARIZING is available for analog noise protocol. The `noise_probs` is necessary for the noise initialization at the `options` parameter.

Reviewer 2: We also have Dephazing noise

from qadence import QuantumCircuit, X, sample, kron, NoiseHandler, NoiseProtocol
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

n_qubits = 2
noise_bitflip = NoiseHandler(NoiseProtocol.DIGITAL.BITFLIP, {"error_probability": 0.1})
noise_amplitude_damping = NoiseHandler(NoiseProtocol.DIGITAL.AMPLITUDE_DAMPING, {"error_probability": 0.3})
block = kron(X(0, noise=noise_bitflip), X(1, noise=noise_amplitude_damping))
circuit = QuantumCircuit(n_qubits, block)

n_shots=1000
xs = sample(circuit, n_shots=n_shots)

items = list(xs[0].keys())
values = [v/n_shots for v in xs[0].values()]

plt.figure()
plt.bar(range(len(values)), values, color='blue', alpha=0.7)
plt.xticks(range(len(items)), items)
plt.title("Probability of state occurrence")
plt.xlabel('Possible States')
plt.ylabel('Probability')
from docs import docsutils # markdown-exec: hide
print(docsutils.fig_to_html(plt.gcf())) # markdown-exec: hide
```

The result of this figure would be a 100% `11` state without noise. However, with `X(0)` bitflip noise, the state `01` has some possibility, and with `X(1)` amplitude damping noise, more gap appears between state pairs of (`00`, `01`) and (`10`, `11`), as shown in the figure.

> ### Digital noisy simulation

Reviewer 2: Isn't this redundant with the previous subsection `Executing Noisy Simulation` ?
